There's no real world (or rather, analog) equivalent to this way of reading, unless of course you're reading an actual scroll. (oh a scroll, I like scrolls)

you have to keep your eyes fixed on a certain point on the moving page (or at least be peripherelly aware of where you left off) in order to determine where to conintue reading

for many of us this happens almost subconsiously, but many, especially inexperienced computer users, find it jarring and confusing. Luckily, computers exist to help us, so let's have them help with this.



Sometimes I'll select a line of text before scrolling to keep track of where I left off reading.

Gör det till en bookmarklet...

scroll props
http://help.dottoro.com/ljqklmpm.php

There are loads of ways to scroll: using the mousewheel, the trackpad, your finger, dragging the scrollbar, clicking the scrollbar arrows, pressing the arrow keys, or page up/down, clicking the mousewheel, and many more.

Scroll distance
Roll the wheel one notch to scroll, with the default being three lines at a time.

Scrolling is confusing - 
Scrolling is jarring
The confusion of scrolling
Scrolling through long text content
Scrolling a long document is confusing
The cognitive load of scrolling
Reducing the cognitive load of scrolling a text document – pretentiöst?
Making scrolling less confusing
Mitigating the cognitive load of scrolling
Reducing –
Adding an indicator
Scroll indicator – a UX concept

--

Scrolling in Firefox for example is much less jarring than in Chrome, due to its implementation of smooth scrolling.

On a page dominated by text on a blank background, there’s nothing for your eyes to latch on to while scrolling. Having a sparse page is often a design choice, and adding superfluous content just to provide a background against which to scroll would be silly.

One solution could be to add a transient anchor for your eyes to latch on to while scrolling.


To understand what I mean
First scroll through this document
Then try this one.
See a demo here. Try the toggle button to see if you think it helps, or makes any difference at all.

The problem with this is that a lot of people start scrolling before reading all the way to the bottom of the page


?Lägg till enable/disable-knapp



It's easy to lose your way when scrolling a long text on a white or otherwise featureless background. When  youve read the text on the screen and scroll down, theres a mental overhead of tracking where yoy left off. This is mitigated by  smooth scrollingm however some browsers (Chrome and IE) don't yet implement smooth sscrolling.

Demo

Try scrolling with and without the indicator. I find that you get used to it quite quickly and start missing it if you turn it off.

the code is on Github. Feel free to fork and improve it.

so everything below the indicator is new


on a mobile device, or other device with touch screen, your finger acts as an indicator of the point below which content is new. ??? what if you add some kind of indicator to the desktop as well

has to be sufficiently noticable to be useful, while avoiding being distracting.

a large block of text is visually homogenous